all right
so you know there's been a lot of
interest in our community about adhd
recently and um
you know we've been talking we gave up
we did a lecture on why adhd people with
adhd wind up with addiction so easily we
also talked about why people with adhd
wind up with depression so easily and
like what are the correlations between
those two things
but one of the key things that i tend to
talk to just about all of my adhd
patients about which we haven't really
talked about here
is uh
why adhd exists
so if you if you guys check out dr k's
guide to depression and dr k's guide to
anxiety there's sections in there about
why depression and anxiety exist
like these are essentially illnesses
that are
hyper activations of existing circuitry
so in the case of depression we have
this thing called the default mode
network which gives us the capacity to
self-reflect
and it's when our self-reflection
capacity gets overblown and turned on
stuck in the on position that we wind up
with depression
so people who are depressed for example
always think about themselves like in a
weird way right they're like oh the
world would be better off without me
where it's like the world doesn't really
you know
it's like
gonna be okay if you're there or not
there right
you start to think like very very
you get stuck thinking about how bad you
are like literally the thoughts in your
mind are stuck on you and your sadness
in anxiety for example anxiety is
nothing but the ability to predict
danger in the future like that's a very
useful circuit to have in the brain
right like we want the ability to
predict problems when that circuit gets
stuck in the on position
we end up sort of like always seeing
danger everywhere because any
uncertainty becomes a source of
danger and so this is the kind of thing
where like you know
as we understand depression anxiety and
if you really want to overcome them you
have to understand like why these things
exist in our brains and where they come
from to truly like understand how they
work and then ultimately master them
so what i'd like to do today we've
talked a lot about adhd and depression
adhd and addiction this and that yadda
yadda procrastination whatever but we've
never talked about why adhd exists or
what is it truly and so my hope today is
to share with you all some information
about my understanding of like why
humans have adhd how adhd is changing
over time and how it may not necessarily
be
a may not necessarily be as maladaptive
as people think
so the first thing to understand uh
before we kind of
dive in is that i'm going to be talking
about adhd
in sort of a broad term and i just want
to acknowledge that for example like
if we look at the
level of adhd across the population
that it kind of varies okay and what i
mean by that is that there's sort of
like a bell curve of attention so let's
do this
okay
so if we want to understand adhd what we
want to do we just have to start by kind
of acknowledging this
so if we look at like people's attention
so the capacity to attend to something
society looks like this
so there's like you know most people
like can sort of control their attention
this is where like most people kind of
exist right so one standard deviation
includes 85 percent of the population
if my statistics is pretty good
but then there are some people over here
who have very strong attention
and then some people down here who have
attention that wanders a lot
so what we're going to talk about is why
human beings have fluctuating or like a
wide span of attention right so if we
look at human beings if we look at
something like let's say we just look at
height
as a quality
or tendency to get anger angry
so like we look at anger or height we
see essentially the same thing so most
attributes within human populations are
going to follow this kind of bell curve
where like 85 percent of people are
going to be here and then some people
get super angry
and then some people are doormats
and that's just how human beings work
so the question is sort of like why and
it tends to be that you know human
beings
have variability in situations that like
variability is beneficial for people so
if we look at something like anger you
know we don't want everyone to be
getting super pissed all the time we
want some people to be like get angry
easily right and maybe they're going to
be our warriors and then we want some
people who are going to be like a little
bit more passive and maybe they're going
to be our farmers
and so we tend to see across human
populations that we have
you know a bell curve of cognitive
ability
and attention is no different so then
the question becomes like why wouldn't
we want everyone having like a super
focused attention you know why do we
want people that have attention that
wanders
and so the the short answer is like
there's a very interesting theory about
hunters versus farmers
so some people did some personality
research and essentially concluded that
there are two types of people
the farmer
is someone who like likes routine
doesn't get bored so like you know
wants stability
so the farmer will like wake up at 5am
every day like go out to the fields do
the same thing like day after day after
day after day and they derive a lot of
pleasure or enjoyment from like things
like routine and stability they really
like they dislike being disrupted so
they don't want like random events to
happen they just want they want to be
able to predict things and they derive a
lot of like pleasure enjoyment and
satisfaction out of routine
and then we have hunters
so hunters are a little bit different
the idea of waking up and doing the same
thing over and over and over again is
like very very like annoying or
frustrating to them they get bored
easily
so what they need to do is they need to
be like more dynamic so they like you
know walking through the jungle and
paying attention to lots of different
stimuli so they're like oh like look
there's like something happening over
here and then this looks like a animal
footprint and what is that that i smell
it seems like something's going on i
smell something strange and then there's
birds circling overhead oh they're like
vultures over there so maybe there's
like some kind of predator over there so
hunters are people that integrate a lot
of in information
and so what we kind of see is that in
like old human society we sort of needed
both right we needed some people to go
out and hunt and we needed some people
to like kind of stay at home and farm
and that the more successful societies
were the ones that had like both
cognitive types okay
so in a sense like what we see is that
attention variation
within populations
is selected for is a positive
so what does that mean for us
okay
what that means for us is that
our society has been shaped over the
last year primarily by farmers right so
like if you kind of look ever since the
industrial revolution like we've had you
know this idea of like fixed time jobs
right like
as as things got more centralized what
we started to see is like okay you go to
the same place every day you have your
job like even the concept of a job like
a thing that you do instead of lots of
things that you do
is like a farmer-oriented society right
because the farmers basically took over
and they're like everyone's gonna have a
job
and this is gonna be your job and i'm
gonna do my job and we're all gonna do
our jobs and then like society will work
wonderfully and then we've got our
hunters who are like i'm bored of my job
i want to do something else and the
farmers were like no
you have to if you want to be outside
instead of being indoors you can deliver
mail become a postal worker
and so our society since the industrial
revolution got heavily shaped by farmers
and so what ended up happening is our
society became more and more methodical
more structured where everyone is the
cog in their you know in in the
particular machine that they're a part
of and the farmers love that kind of
thing they're like fantastic like
everyone is a cog there's perfect order
there's stability and the world is is
going well
and then there's a group of people who
are the hunters who started to struggle
in this society so they actually started
to like move into potentially like more
um dynamic professions right so as
schooling got implemented
we started selecting for people who can
sit in a chair from eight to three
so now we started selecting people for
their ability to sit in a chair and then
we added college which is like okay who
is like farmer enough
to not be forced into learning and kind
of can kind of learn on their own
so then we added something like a gpa
right and what we did is we selected for
people in college who are like not
dynamic they're people who can force
themselves to go to class or they don't
have to force themselves they like going
to class because they're structured they
go to their 8 a.m class they study on
time they do everything on time they
don't procrastinate and we're going to
reward these people so over time what
happened
is society
became pro-farmer
and then we did something interesting
okay what we did is we took the hunter
kids
in school
and we said oh my god these hunter kids
are they're not able to sit and do what
they're supposed to
right
and so then we started diagnosing them
with adhd so there's a couple of
interesting things here
the first is that studies have been done
that the student teacher ratio
determines the likelihood of getting
diagnosed with adhd if you have one
teacher to 30 students versus one
teacher to 15 students adhd will be like
twice as likely to be diagnosed in this
group than this group and that's
controlling for number of kids so if i
have
two uh let's put it this way
you know like if i have two classrooms
one that has
30 kids and two teachers and one that
has 30 kids and one teacher like the
number of adhd diagnoses in this
classroom is going to be way higher
and so what we begin to see is something
that's interesting about a disorder
which is that a disorder especially
mental illnesses
disorders aren't just disorders by
themselves a disorder evolves when
there's a genetic vulnerability
plus environmental
circumstance so what we see in adhd is
that if you literally look at the term
disorder there's a lack of order or
function within a particular environment
and so for people who have adhd what it
is is their mind is dynamic
right so that may be the genetic
vulnerability they may be a hunter and
what we're doing is we're putting them
in a classroom
right we're sticking them on a farm and
so this is where the disorder the
disorder arises between within this gap
and this is what adhd is now this is
where we have to go back for a second to
our
bell curve and acknowledge that like
for a lot of people that i work with
with adhd it's about finding the right
environment for them to to thrive in and
then their illness no longer becomes a
disorder it can actually become a
disadvantage i mean an advantage but
there are there are certainly people who
have very disordered attention to where
like they lit like really it is like
feels like a very serious like illness
to me but i would say that the majority
of people that i work with with adhd
even though it is an illness or a
disorder or uh makes their life hard
that i would say like two-thirds of them
about 70 of them can function very well
with their adhd in the right
circumstance and in fact it's even
advantageous
so there are some professions that we'll
talk about so event planner is actually
surprisingly one
other examples are like twitch streamer
esports athlete
so actually a lot of professions
even working in the emergency room
um can that or being a paramedic
being a plumber
there are several professions that
bizarrely enough seem to like work
totally fine with people with adhd
and there are some situations where adhd
in having a dynamic mindset because
remember that the reason you're getting
diagnosed
is because you're unable to sit in a
classroom for like
seven hours a day right so like there
are even some professions which are
actually geared towards adhd
and if you actually like go back and
watch all of the uh interviews we've
done with streamers what you'll find is
that like like a greater percentage of
streamers compared to the normal
population have adhd just based on their
own self-report right like so many
people like will say like oh yeah i have
adhd
and it turns out that this kind of
hunter mentality can actually be
advantageous in some some situations
so
um
just to kind of recap i think the key
point here is that there are two kinds
of people there's like farmers and
they're hunters
and when you stick a hunter in a
farmer's society there you'll create an
environmental circumstance that allows
their dynamic mind to start to become
like a disorder or not function well
there's also sort of evidence to this
where like when kids get individualized
attention
they're able to perform better in school
and don't get kind of evaluated or
diagnosed for adhd
so there's a lot of stuff about like you
know just the amount of structure that
people can tolerate the other thing that
tends to go on in a lot of schools is
that people will medicate children
for the purpose of obedience right so
like if i have if i'm a if i'm a teacher
and i've got like 30 rowdy kids and i
medicate the five rowdiest of them then
it's like easy for me to like teach my
class right
and what we tend to see is like the most
disruptive kids get diagnosed with adhd
because they can't restrain their
attention
so next thing that we're going to talk
about is like what is
attention deficit disorder add or adhd
and we're going to talk a little bit
about some myths around adhd and some
like tricky things about diagnosis so
the first thing to understand is that it
is a disorder
of attention
okay so this is where a lot of people
get tripped up so disorders of attention
basically the way that i think about it
is an inability
to control
your attention
so this is
this
the lack of this understanding is why i
think adhd is the most over diagnosed
and the most under diagnosed psychiatric
diagnosis and you may wonder how can
something be over-diagnosed and
under-diagnosed at the same time
the reason that you can have that is
because you get a lot of people who
don't have the disorder that are getting
a diagnosis
and you are missing a lot of the people
that do have a diagnosis but you don't
catch it because of other things so here
are a couple of common misnomers about
adhd that people don't get
the first is that people with adhd can't
focus
this is actually incorrect
so with adhd we see a disorder of
attention so what we see with adhd is
actually hyper focus
plus a lack of focus
so what is actually very common in
people with adhd is that they can sit
and do one activity for four hours at a
stretch provided it is the right
activity
so what you see is a disorder of
attention where once an adhd kid is
doing something it is very very hard to
get them to change gears
so once they almost have like an
obsessive quality to their attention
okay
so this is one of the reasons that it
gets misdiagnosed because like parents
will be sitting there with their kids
and they'll be like he never pays
attention to school but once he starts
playing with legos like you have to
physically pull him away like it is so
hard to get his attention once they are
doing something that they're super into
so this sort of disruption of focus
or this like inability to control your
attention can result in hyper focus and
it's because parents or teachers or
other people will see the hyper focus
they'll even see it with a particular
subject it's like
my kid can't pay attention in math but
like as long as it's history he can sit
there and read books like you can give
him like a history book at the age of
seven and he'll like read it for four
hours at a time
so people with adhd can absolutely hyper
focus on particular things and in this
situation it can also be like
maladaptive because you can't change
your your focus you can't stop uh
studying history and start studying
mathematics
plus a lack of focus so when it comes to
mathematics you have once again like an
inability
to focus
so when i think about disordered
attention what i really when i think
about adhd i think about disordered
attention when i think about disordered
attention it is both a combination of
hyper focus and lack of focus okay
so the next thing to kind of think a
little bit about
is um
let me just think for a second
whether i want to say anything about
this does this make sense to people
okay
so the next thing to talk a little bit
about i'm going to go over just a couple
of other like reasons why adhd is
misdiagnosed
so the first is that we just kind of
talked about is that
adhd kids sometimes hyper focus
therefore people think oh since they're
capable of hyper focus
they uh
don't actually have adhd so other
reasons are good grades
so oftentimes what you'll have is kids
with adhd
who have high iqs plus
adhd and what this results in is good
grades and just because a kid is like
brute force iq their way through things
or develops compensatory mechanisms for
studying so like they're not actually
able to sit in focus but they may
develop all kinds of compensatory
mechanisms like group studying
another example of self-medication with
drugs
another example is being a night owl
and you may wonder what does being a
night owl have to do with adhd well let
me explain to you
so people with adhd sometimes find that
a certain amount of fatigue
slows down their mind
and allows them to study
right
and so you'll also see this this kind of
pattern will they'll do other things to
slow their mind down either drugs or
they'll even play video games
they'll do things that kind of make them
like half exhausted so that their mind
is able to like sit properly
so we see a lot of misdiagnosis actually
because kids have good grades because
kids are smart so we miss the diagnosis
another reason that we've already talked
about is things like class size
so this is another reason why kids are
diagnosed with adhd is because like you
know there's just too many kids in the
class and so normally like if you think
about a six-year-old like a six-year-old
is only supposed to be able to hold
their attention for a certain amount of
time
but depending on external pressures
class size things like that
you can actually get like over diagnosis
of adhd
there's also remember uh another reason
that it's misdiagnosed is like you know
uh how can i say this like
development idiosyncrasies
so remember that
the primary reason the regions of the
brain that are involved in adhd are the
frontal lobes
or executive function which if you guys
watch either of my other lectures on
depression or
addiction you'll realize this statement
is a huge oversimplification because we
go over all the different regions of the
brain that adhd affects
so
executive dysfunction
is kind of what we're looking at right
and so we also have to remember that
like
kids develop at different rates so not
all seven-year-olds are gonna behave the
same right just like
height or appetite or puberty or all
manner of other like developmental
milestones
our frontal lobes ability and our
executive dysfunction or function
develops at its own idiosyncratic rate
and so some people are just like you
know some people start puberty early
some people start puberty late in the
same way some people's frontal lobes
develop earlier some people's frontal
lobes develop later like i see this even
in my two kids because my older kid has
like a super developed frontal lobe for
her age and my younger kid like by
comparison it doesn't have frontal lobe
that's quite as developed or not
anywhere near and that's just like
individually the way they are like the
younger one will get there and this is
going to take her some amount of time
so there are developmental
idiosyncrasies that will cause people to
diagnose kids with adhd and you may get
a label and once you get a label you're
like oh i have adhd even though as your
frontal lobe develops you may grow out
of adhd and if you guys kind of think
like how is it possible to grow out of
adhd just think about the attention span
of a 2 year old versus 4 year old versus
14 year old versus 40 year old right the
attention span naturally changes over
time so even if you get diagnosed at the
age of 12 with adhd you may not have
adhd when you're 22. it doesn't
necessarily have to be a lifelong
diagnosis
so this is another reason that people
get misdiagnosed with adhd
so class size or environment
so there's another thing that oftentimes
like these are the ways in which adhd
gets missed this is why it gets
misdiagnosed this is sort of how it gets
misdiagnosed
so what i mean by that
is that a lot of times like kids with
adhd will be labeled with behavioral
problems
okay so like you'll get a kid and
they'll they'll be like oh they like oh
here's another one actually
so doesn't listen
or is defiant
okay this is really really common we
remember that the problem with adhd is
like attentional control so if an adhd
kid is playing with legos their parents
will say that this person doesn't listen
and oftentimes like like you know let's
say you have a kid with adhd and you
tell them go wash your hands and then
the kid like on the way to the bathroom
will get distracted by something because
they'll see like a toy on the floor and
they'll start picking it up they'll
start playing with the toy and the
parents will get mad at them
right and once they get mad at they're
like like you you're not listening to me
you never listen bad child bad child bad
child and so this not listening thing
gets sometimes perceived as defiance and
then the punishment that they get
then leads to shame
and self-esteem problems and a lack of
agency
so we talked about this in the
depression lecture as well where a lot
of times like
you know kids with adhd will get
like
punished or they'll have different kinds
of experiences either social experiences
behavioral experiences like school
experiences they're perceived as not
being obedient right so that's kind of
like the defiant thing
so we'll get all these kids who actually
have adhd who are labeled as bad kids so
they have behavioral problems they don't
listen they're defiant you know they're
argumentative
um there are all kinds of problems that
these kids will kind of get labeled as
but that's not they don't actually have
those problems they're not being defiant
it's not like the kid is like walking to
the bathroom and is like screw my
parents i'm gonna play something
what they end up doing is they just get
distracted by something and then they
like they just get distracted by it and
then they get punished for it and then
they feel bad because they don't even
really realize what they did wrong right
they sort of connect the dots afterward
but in the moment their mind just like
switches gears and they forget
there's another thing they get perceived
as forgetful
right so oh like this person is just
forgetful like their memory is terrible
i've even had this
so i one time had um a dude come into my
office and say like
i think i may have dementia and the dude
was like in his like late 20s
and i was like why do you think you have
dementia i was like that's bizarre like
i don't hear that every day they're like
well my memory is just terrible and i
was like well tell me about that and
he's like well my wife tells me i forget
stuff all the time
so we started talking about it and then
like the more that i realized like oh
this guy doesn't have a memory problem
he has like an attention problem so this
is where if we remember so if we think
about like memories stored in our brain
let's say this is where memories are
stored
remember they have to get in they have
to get put in somewhere and then they
have to get recalled
and so if if this is missing
or you can't recall it properly we think
oh like
it it you know i wasn't able to recall
it but the truth is it never got planted
in in the first place so a good example
of this is if someone tells me if i ask
like this is a classic example okay the
easy example of understanding attention
versus recall
who here meets a bunch of people at a
party and forgets their names right like
it doesn't have to be a bunch of people
it can even be one person you meet one
person you you're like hey my name is
olok and they say my name is whatever
like it doesn't never even sinks in
like and you're like oh i forgot
that person's name
right and it's like how can you forget
that person's name so quickly like
within five seconds of introducing
yourself you forget their name within
two seconds of introducing yourself
you're like what was that person's name
again and then you just or they just
introduced themselves you've already
forgotten the name so you don't like
think that you're like oh well it's
stupid i can't just ask them like right
away like what is your name right so why
does that happen it's an intentional
thing because when you introduce
yourselves your attention is on your
introduction so you're not listening to
them so the name never gets implanted in
your brain in the first place
right so it's never being entered in
and so this is why people with adhd have
like
they they get perceived as forgetful
it's not because they have any problem
with recall they don't have dementia
it's just that their attention is
wandering so the stuff never gets put in
in the first place
okay
so this is like
when we kind of look at the misdiagnosis
of adhd or let's start from the top so
like adhd essentially is a disorder of
attention and that attentional disorder
can result in hyper focus which leads to
a lot of misdiagnosis because parents
are like oh like you know he can like do
roblox all day long no big deal also
gaming
right so we'll talk about let's talk
about gaming in a second but
uh it's both hyper focus plus a lack of
focus it tends to get misdiagnosed or
missed in a lot of people
due to their ability to get good grades
which oftentimes has to do with like
compensatory mechanisms that they'll set
up
um can get misdiagnosed due to things
like class size or environment because
remember a psychiatric diagnosis tends
to be a vulnerability plus an
environmental factor combined
and then um another reason that it gets
misdiagnosed is because people just
develop at their own pace
so it's like you can't expect all
seven-year-olds to be able to sit in the
classroom at the same
level right some kids are going to
really love it some kids it's going to
be hard and then like people will sort
of grow out of it
so oftentimes kids with adhd get
misdiagnosed with things like behavioral
problems problems like oh they don't
listen they get punished for defiance or
lack of obedience um for being forgetful
oh my kid is like they're just
completely forgetful like i can't rely
on them for you know to remember
anything and it's not an issue of recall
it's an issue of attention
so let's talk about gaming for a second
in adhd
why do kids with adhd love gaming it's
because games demand your attention
okay
so like this is the cool thing about a
video game right like it doesn't ever
kind of get boring it just like and and
people with adhd will self select for
particular video games that um will
demand their attention in the right way
so the game is constantly giving you
stimuli
right so it's like oh like there's a
random encounter here if i'm playing
like fortnite or a battle royale like
now there's someone over here or like i
can queue up for a game of league and
there's always like some kind of thing
that is like triggering and pulling in
your attention
and so this is also where people will
get misdiagnosed because parents will be
like i don't understand why my kid can't
study he can sit there and literally
play on you know on a computer for like
12 hours like without stopping for food
and that is once again because it is
disordered attention
right so they can hyper focus
so video games are are very very
addictive to people with adhd because
they allow your mind to be fully focused
and it's sort of like a never ending
like ability to get focused and this is
where we can almost take a quick
spiritual detour
and we can acknowledge that if you look
at like old texts on yoga and meditation
they say that focus
equals bliss
that the happy mind is not an anxious
mind or a distracted mind but a focused
mind so if you do something like watch a
sunset
why do sunsets look so cool it's because
they like allow you to focus your mind
if we look at the nature of like
um you know
unhappiness in the mind it's usually
like unfocused thoughts
so a good example of this is
anxiety
when you're thinking about one thing and
you're thinking about another thing and
you're thinking about a third thing you
may think that it's all the same thought
but if you really pay attention to
anxiety it's actually rapidly moving
thoughts you may be anxious about a
party
but you may think oh does that mean that
i'm focused on the party no if you
actually pay attention to your thoughts
you're not focused on the party when you
have anxiety about going to a party
you're like oh what if i'm wearing the
wrong thing and then what if people
think i'm stupid and then people won't
like me and who am i gonna talk to am i
gonna be standing in the corner with a
drink not talking to myself and
everyone's gonna think i'm a loser and
then like i'm gonna walk up and try to
join a conversation and that's gonna
seem super awkward because i'm just like
walking up and not saying anything so
you kind of think about like all these
15 different things it's not one thought
it's not like watching a sunset where
you're not like thinking oh like the
sunset has this sunspot here and then
it's got this and then it's got this and
then it's got this you're just absorbed
in the experience
so yogi sort of figured out that focus
equals bliss and if you can be absorbed
in one thing that will lead to a mental
feeling of like calmness and enjoyment
and so this is what's so addictive about
gaming is that gaming sort of gives us a
sense of focus
and so even though the game is rage
inducing we find ourselves drawn to it
why because we can be absorbed within it
right so like a good example of this is
like if you if you play something like
dark souls like while you're fighting
the boss you have like laser focus and
it's after you get one-shotted that you
throw your controller down and smash
everything right but it's it's the sh
because when you get one shot at in dark
souls what happens it shatters your
beautiful focus
when you're playing like league of
legends or valerant or whatever you're
like hyper focused and it's when your
teammate ins down mid
that it shatters your focus and then you
start raging why because this thing gets
taken away from you
okay
so we see kind of that gaming and adhd
are like really really great because
they take your disordered attention and
allow you to hyper focus on it so easily
and the mind just loves that from a
spiritual perspective by spiritual
perspective i mean this is sort of like
the way that the yogi's looked at things
it's not really like scientific in the
sense that they didn't do like you know
a randomized controlled trial on ten
thousand humans what they did is look at
themselves with like ten thousand
intensity they took an n of one and
explored it all the way down to the core
okay
so now let's talk a little bit since
we're on the topic of gaming so now
let's talk a little bit about like being
adhd in the modern world
okay and why is this important
it's because if we look at our world our
world is changing rapidly so remember
that the industrial revolution
basically made us a society of farmers
right where everyone is a cog in the
wheel or cog in
the machine
right we have nine to five
all this other stuff there's this idea
of high school
college
career even the word career you guys get
this the word career implies like one
thing that you do for your entire life
it's a farmer biased word you guys get
that it's not like
and then the there's like the
opposite is odd jobs
right like and so you guys see like the
value judgment difference between these
two things so if you look at someone
like elon musk like he doesn't have a
career
he's a dude with odd jobs
you all get that like bill gates had a
career elon musk has odd jobs he's like
uh i'm a i'm gonna start a company that
sends people into space
i'm gonna start an electric car company
i'ma start a company that
drills into the ground and like
high-speed rail transport like on
california
right so like this is where if we look
at the industrial revolution and the
consequence of the industrial revolution
what we see is that like there's such a
heavy bias
about what is successful and what is
good versus what is bad and it's very
very farmer focused it's very
anti-hunter
okay
but now like the world is changing so
like i'll just give you guys a couple of
examples okay so like what tends to
happen is
over time our attention can transform so
we can you know make our attention more
farmer-like
or we can go over here and make it
more hunter-like
so
studies that have been done which
basically show that like
short content makes people more adhd so
there are studies that show that like so
people will sometimes ask me okay is it
okay if my kid like uses a screen
and they're like what do you think about
screen time dr k and that's where like i
know it sounds kind of weird but not all
screen time is the same like there's no
such thing i mean there is something is
screen time
but how you use the screen
makes a big difference oh my god that's
just completely a legible chat
even that's too much for me
so for example what i'll advise parents
to do is long form content on a on a
screen is fine
so for example a movie is okay
but youtube
compilations
are bad
and let's just think about this so like
if i spend my days watching movies
my brain is literally going to be
entrained
to pay attention to something over long
periods of time if i watch youtube
compilations my attention is shifting
like every 60 seconds so ads are another
thing that makes things like more
hunter-like increases the dynamic nature
of our mind so now let's look at a
couple of different things okay so like
let's look at a couple of categories
let's talk about content
then let's talk about uh
discussion
okay
and then let's talk about dating
so let's look at like how these things
have progressed over time
so back in the day if i wanted content
what i had to do was read a book
right and this was like
a 30 hour
endeavor
and then what happened someone like
invented television where they're like
oh look there's a tv show and now it's
like a one hour endeavor
right and then someone came along and
invented youtube
and now it's like
anywhere from five to 15 minutes
right and then someone came along and
was like hey let's do this live
and they invented twitch now you can
watch a stream for like eight hours at a
stretch but like you know there's
there's an increase in the dynamic
nature of twitch
right in which which content platform is
growing the most rapidly there it is
good job
tick tock which is like less than 60
seconds bro
so what's happening is like we are
actually selecting for shorter and
shorter attention spans so as kids start
watching tick tock and if we kind of
look at the adhd diagnosis
adhd has been increasing
all along
right over time if we go down this way
we'll see an increase in adhd diagnosis
next thing to kind of think about let's
think about like discussions
for lack of a better term so it used to
be like people talking
like let's like
you know the roman senate
and then like people hanging out on
porches right so these were like
long things like people would talk for
hours
and then what's happening is like
the internet comes along and then we
have these things called discussion
forums which if you still go to places
like rpg codex you'll see like
discussion forums that are like years
old right you'll have a thread that's
like years old where people are still
talking about it
and then over time we even get things
like reddit where it's like there's some
discussion but the discussion like tends
to happen like temporarily or shortly
and then we end up with things like
twitch
and twitter
which is like if you blink you'll miss
chat right
and so we see the same thing oh no we're
lagging gg
we have to move
um
we see things like twitch and twitter
where like the the discussion rate is
very very rapid
and let's even talk about dating
okay so dating there used to be
courtship
this is like a long and drawn out
process of like balls and meetings and
things like that
and then after the courtship process
like years later centuries later we
started this thing called dating
right so people will say are you walking
out with someone or whatever terminology
they used and that like dating is like a
little bit more dynamic you meet a
couple more people you kind of do you
know
it takes a couple months maybe a couple
years like courtship is like more
structured
and then after dating you know more
recently i'd say in the last 20 30 years
like as the availability of birth
control kind of increased
we sort of have like a hookup culture
right where like it's no longer just
about getting married like you don't
even need to get married you can just
like date for the sake of dating and you
can like hook up just to have a good
time like there's no there's no value
judgment attached to it and now we have
tinder and in the courtship you're like
dealing with one person
and the dating thing let's say you're
dealing with like three to five people
in the hookup culture maybe you're
dealing with like five to
20 depending on oh god once again
terrible handwriting
and then like tinder it's like literally
a numbers game so it's like 99 plus
right so we see that society is like
moving in this direction
as we move in this direction we're going
to see an increase
in adhd like symptoms
oh my god
chat
dr k is on the struggle bus today
and as we see an increase in adhd like
symptoms
like we're gonna see like more people
feeling like they have adhd but
something interesting is also happening
which is that society is moving away
from the farmers
so
if you guys read anything by like
charles dickens
right like there's like back in the day
of like book writing
or like tolstoy
very very like long attention span
authors and long attention span like
consumers of content
and so what's happening over time is
that we're getting like
going down this way where like as
society becomes adhd the more adhd
mindset becomes more advantageous
so this is where like it's been my
experience for example with twitch
streamers
that the average twitch streamer is more
adhd than the average like
person
and what that actually does for them is
actually gives them a competitive
advantage so even this kind of stuck out
with me we did an interview with the
daily dose of the internet dude
so if you you like think about the ddo i
guy like what he basically does is like
uses his own attention span
as like a judge for what the internet
will like or not like
right so his attention span
becomes
a tool
instead of
a problem now remember he still exists
in a primarily farmer society where
there's like bank accounts and monthly
payments and this and that and mortgages
and credit scores and all this stuff so
we're not saying that like it's
necessarily an advantage but i have seen
that like as we get more and more
twitter oriented our attention spans
seem to be shorter so if you look at
political discourse
over the case over time right so it
started off with like let's say the
roman senate where people go and
construct arguments
and like we'll discuss for hours and
hours at a time and now we've got like
twitter trolls
right who will just make like bizarre
political statements that no one fact
checks has no nuance and just incites
emotion
so it's almost like being adhd means
that you can't be a senator in ancient
rome but having adhd in today's society
makes you a political pundit like it's
easy
right
so this is like a good example of how
our society is actually moving more
towards adhd we're sort of cultivating a
shorter attention span but bizarrely
actually this may serve as an advantage
for those of you who feel like you've
got adhd
and so there are a couple of other
trends for example that like some
companies have embraced so i don't know
if you guys know this but like google
for example last time i checked or based
on the clients i've worked on does not
have a nine to five work culture
they're like we don't care when you come
in you can work at like two in the
morning if you want to just needs to get
done on time like we don't care like
when you come in and so google also sort
of figured out that like okay we're just
going to give our engineers like a
cafeteria and a place that's open 24
hours and they can come and work
wherever they want to so they've sort of
selected for the night owls and they did
something really cool here because
remember in the nine to five work
culture like these people would not be
able to get a job or they wouldn't be
able to keep a job even though they're
super talented and could be very good
programmers and so by google sort of
stepping away from the the farmer
culture and moving towards like a more
free culture they actually allow these
people that may be a little bit more
adhd maybe late risers maybe circadian
rhythm disorder folks
to actually be productive programmers
another example of this is actually work
from home
right so work from home like more and
more people are moving towards work from
home which is like you may wonder okay
what does that have to do with adhd but
it's like a less structured environment
right so we're moving away from
structure towards dynamic work
environments and the more that we move
in those directions i think the more
that the adhd crowd will be like more
able to like do a good job so i'll give
you guys just a very simple example of
how work from home like supports adhd so
remember people with adhd have hyper
focus
or disordered focus
or lack of focus right and the problem
if you've got adhd you guys may know
this is that like you know your typical
day is like waiting to get inspired to
work panicking procrastinating and then
every now and then you get a four hour
window
you get these four magical hours where
you do 24 hours of work
you guys know what i mean
and so it's like you just like wake up
one day and you're like let's go and
then you just do all the work
and then like for the rest of the week
you're trying to figure out why couldn't
i do that on monday like when is that
gonna happen again and so the work from
home culture allows these people to
succeed because if you're like an adhd
person you have to work from nine to
five like what happens if your magical
four hours doesn't happen in that window
you're screwed you're never gonna get
promoted you're gonna get fired
it's like gg
so as we work from home it's sort of
like you just kind of work from home you
can be in your pajamas but if you've got
a flash of inspiration what used to
happen is you get a flash of inspiration
oh no gotta change out of my pajamas put
on my suit commute for an hour and by
the time you get to the office it's like
you're hungry over caffeinated and like
it's shattered
your muse is gone
and now in the work from home
environment it's like if you get that
flash of inspiration it's like you don't
even need to put on pants you just sit
down and like bang out like you program
like a madman for four hours
and then you can go and like get some
pizza afterward
right
and so like our society is actually
moving in an unstructured environment
things are getting more adhd but on the
flip side if you have if your attention
span
is more in this realm
you may actually find that you have some
competitive advantages
questions
so just to kind of summarize okay so
let's like do major points first of all
adhd
exists
for a reason right and this goes into
why society needs farmers
and hunters
okay
generally speaking adhd
gets
over
and under
diagnosed
okay so it gets misinterpreted in a lot
of ways
what is it it's a disorder
of attention
which means
hyper focus
plus
lack of focus
and this confuses a lot of people
point number three society
is
increasing adhd
but on the flip side
if you have adhd
you may actually have an advantage
as long as you're careful about making
it an advantage
okay so this is why people are adhd if
y'all if this kind of resonates with you
like now hopefully you have like a big
high order sense of like why things are
this way
and also like just think a lot about
this point especially so when i work
with with individuals
what i'll really do is work really hard
to try to figure out okay like what is
your unique
like advantage that you can bring to a
dif like a particular work environment
or your goals or whatever and what i
found time and time and time again is
that we don't need to medicate them
to turn them into like essentially
farmers
what it's really about and sometimes
they still need medication but
what it's really about is creating sort
of a life or structure
that allows your dynamic mind to be an
advantage instead of a disadvantage
okay questions
can you have low attention span without
adhd absolutely
right so like that's what i'm saying is
that as a whole society is shrinking our
attention span
you all get that
because you don't need an attention span
the way that you used to like
entertainment used to involve reading a
book
so like think about this every time that
like 200 years ago every time someone
read a book what they're doing is in
training their attention span to be
longer
and now if like if i'm just like chain
watching stuff like and that too you can
you know you can tell they're different
kinds of content consumers there's the
long form podcast content consumer
there's the high energy twitch chat
consumer and there's like something in
the middle which is like the 25 minute
video essay on youtube
and so depending on where your attention
span is you may gravitate towards a
particular kind of content and depending
on which kind of content you watch you
will be in training your attention span
a particular way
if all you watch is youtube compilations
of memes a podcast is gonna feel super
boring
what if i watch both well that's like
that's totally normal right so like
the mind doesn't always want the same
kind of thing so there's also a
variation
in like
how consistently you like your content
like some people only like to read books
and can't stand movies and some people
are like i like game of thrones books
i like game of thrones tv show and
season 8 is the best tv is the best
season of
television that has ever been created in
the history of humanity there's
variation within populations
right
it's truly a masterpiece
right so now we understand like the
advantage this by the way
so i love lecturing like in person
so like i love teaching
but like i can't make a youtube video
for the life of me like i just can't sit
down like i've tried it a thousand times
where i'm just like talking to the
camera i just can't do it i need some
amount of like actual energy to like
keep my mind going
uh so someone's saying i thought drugs
were a big part of treatment for adhd
so oftentimes
medicine is used for adhd so let's go
over like basic evidence around adhd
treatments okay first thing to
understand is that medication is as
effective as therapy so if you go to
like a cognitive behavioral therapist
who teaches you how to focus your mind
and like map things out and all these
other skills you can learn skills that
are just as effective as taking like
adderall or methylphenidate or whatever
it's taking
adhd medication this is something that
is very very poorly like understood in
society is that you can get the benefit
of medication without medication like
the effect sizes are the same
second thing to understand is that the
reason that people do medication is
because it's easy
right so it's like very easy especially
if you've got a 13 year old like taking
your 13 year old to therapy twice a week
so they can entrain the right kind of
skills
is like very expensive
and cumbersome it's like you gotta get
in the car
drive them to their appointment they
have an hour-long appointment as a
parent you have to wait around
pick them up and bring them home
so it's like a two-hour investment twice
a week
which is like four hours and it's just
easier to medicate them
and it's like the medication works right
away
right the kids love it too you guys are
just bashing on the parents like the
kids love it they're like i take a pill
and suddenly my mind works like everyone
else's that's easy i don't want to sit
here and map out my week for an hour
twice a week it's torture
does that make sense
other questions
uh is that why adults get meds since
their brains are already developed it's
harder to train those skills no so sort
of so the reason that
adults get meds is because their brain
is naturally developed maybe as much as
it will but even then your frontal lobes
develop until the age of about 30 or 32
and i suspect that we're even delaying
the amount of time that it takes our
frontal lobes to mature so i think that
if you do a study in 10 years about when
the frontal lobes mature it'll like
they'll mature by 35 so i think that's
changing so our frontal lobes are
maturing slowly
than before or there's more maturation
to be had
the reason that adults get meds sure
you're not you just can't count on your
frontal lobes developing more if you're
like over 32
but they can train those skills in cbt
just as well as kids can argue yeah so
most of the studies are done in adults
so that's not the issue the issue is
once again if you're an adult it's just
easier right
uh what's the link to
uh
is there any link between giftedness and
adhd that's an excellent question and
one that we're actively researching
right now so we do a lot of different
research here at hg and we're actually
looking into that question so we've
noticed that there's a lot of people in
our community who are gifted kids
and there are a lot of people in our
community who have adhd so is there an
overlap it's something we're actively
investigating
how do i confirm if i have adhd or not
you go get a professional evaluation so
someone saying
dr russell barkley makes the point that
medication for adhd is like providing a
wheelchair to someone with a mobility
issue i completely agree
and let's just look at that
statement more closely so providing a
wheelchair to someone with a mobility
issue
is like
more complicated than it seems so
depending on the mobility issue is this
person able to walk like if they've been
in a car accident and they need to go to
rehab and learn to walk again
or are they missing their legs
can they learn to use prostheses so much
like adhd is providing a wheelchair
sometimes you need a wheelchair and
sometimes that person will need the
wheelchair for the rest of their life
but there are populations of people that
we are sticking in wheelchairs and we're
never teaching them how to walk again
and so that's a problem because i think
much like mobility issues
there's a differential diagnosis for
what's causing your mobility issue and
there are different treatment options to
see that to address your mobility issue
it may be a prosthetic it may be a
wheelchair it may be that you can walk
without either
you just have to train it up the right
way
why do people say adhd is fake so you'd
you'd probably have to ask them first of
all but i'd say it has to do with a lot
of the misdiagnosis stuff that i talked
about earlier so adhd is oftentimes
perceived
as a different kind of problem like oh
this person is defiant or isn't
listening
the other reason that i think people say
adhd is fake is because they have a
neurotypical brain
and so like it's easy for them they take
it for granted that their mind is able
to focus and they cannot imagine a world
in which their mind just like gets
unplugged at random times or switches
the channel on you right so like imagine
that you're watching television
and you control what channel you're
watching and then like
imagine a different scenario where like
your channel randomly changes
if you've had a remote control your
entire life it can be very hard for you
to understand that like other people's
channels are just randomly changing and
they have no control over that
it's such a given in their life that
they have some degree of attentional
control
what are the downsides to meds there are
some downsides
it it's very kind of individualistic so
like remember that prescribing
medication is about a balance of
benefits versus hindrances
so i try to steer clear of medications
in general like so about 30 of people in
my practice have medication i have no
value judgment like i'm not saying that
you shouldn't be on medication i
prescribe this stuff after all
but i think that oftentimes like i was
saying with the wheelchair analogy that
medication will sometimes be a
substitute for some amount of like
growth or change
which sometimes people just don't have
the bandwidth for like i have a patient
for example who's got like you know two
teenagers and they just don't have the
time
to like
do yoga and like a juice cleanse
right so it's like just take your ssri
like don't worry about it like you can
take care of yourself like down the road
but right now you have like more
important things to worry about so so
medication is like useful because it is
easy right
so with adhd for example some of the
things that i get concerned about are is
the brain development but we don't
really know exactly how that how
stimulants affect brain development over
time
um it's not clear that it's really
harmful at all there are definitely
concerns for a lot of stimulant
medication with being underweight and
appetite suppression so remember when
you take a medication it gets dissolved
and distributed throughout your entire
body so medications will have effects in
many places besides your brain
and so one example of like stimulant
medication is that it suppresses
appetite so if you have a 13 year old
who is going undergoing a growth spurt
and normally they're consuming a high
amount of calories
and you give them like adhd medication
sometimes they won't feel as hungry how
will that affect their long-term growth
so it does appear that there are weight
changes that happen with adhd medication
which you have to be careful about
that's just one example so would you
recommend a forcefully extended tension
span it depends on where you are on the
spectrum so i'd recommend that you
should be in control of your attention
span and so if you tell your mind to do
something it should listen
so if i tell it hey it's time to stream
forget about dota it should listen it
can kick and scream a little bit like
mine did today but then it sort of gets
in gear
if you tell it hey it's time to study it
should sit and listen
that's what i'd recommend
how do you deal with an inferiority
complex caused by adhd so i don't know
if you've seen the
the
um adhd and depression lecture but i'd
start by watching that you can also
check out dr k's guide to depression so
for those of y'all that are dealing with
inferiority complexes
so the guide to depression has a lot of
stuff about some scars and like the way
that those complexes form which maybe we
can talk about today
but there's like more detail about how
to digest those dissolve those etc in
the guide
we'll talk about that today though
some scott is excellent
someone's doing their homework
okay shall we move on
so bro i'm dealing with every complex
and it ain't pretty like i get that
that's why in the guide we talk about
how to deal with all of the complexes so
this is something that i like about
eastern psychology more so than western
psychology so western psychology is
really good at like diagnosing the
content of the mind so i'll say like oh
this person has an ethical edible
complex this person has narcissistic
personality disorder this person you
know like has borderline personality
disorder this person is a sociopath or
psychopath
so they'll they're really good at like
describing the content of the person's
mind
but i think eastern psychology has a
better handle on the process of mind so
how fundamentally does a complex form
where do complexes come from
and how do we get rid of them and then
the particulars of it are like whatever
you want but that's why like we kind of
go into detail we'll talk about this
today i'll teach something about it
but if you guys are interested in this
that's why we have five of the common
some scars that lead to depression so
these are five complexes that people
experience that cause them to be
depressed one example is like i'm
hopeless therefore like there's no point
in doing anything it's almost almost
this nihilism doomer complex another
example is falling behind i've fallen
behind
therefore
you know
like
it's too late
so there are a lot of different things
that you can kind of examine
um so if you guys are interested in the
nature of how complexes form like
definitely check out the depression
guide
okay let's talk about
uh uh
how do i deal with micromanaging parents
and the consequences in my mid-20s we'll
talk about we'll do a holiday stream
about parents and micromanagement or
something let me think about that
so someone saying structure and
discipline are hard need tips so this is
why where i'd say
agreed structure and discipline are hard
but remember that you don't necessarily
have to
rely on structure and discipline right
you can rely on like inspiration and
environment
so what i'd say is if you guys have
difficulties here's like a quick
nutshell if you have difficulties with
structure and discipline and that's not
what you're good at just don't bother in
a weird way so all the discipline you
need is like set up a study group for
example and then like just make all the
discipline you need is not to study for
eight hours because if you're studying
by yourself
right like you
are going to
yeah
if you you're studying by yourself every
hour you have to make a check like a
willpower check and if you fail your
check you start playing a video game
but if you're studying with a group of
friends like you just have to make one
willpower check to get there and then
they will keep you involved
when i say inspire that's where your
company is very important if you're
around a bunch of people who are like
you know entrepreneurs like you will
naturally have a more entrepreneurial
bend if you're around a bunch of people
who are like game developers and like
there's a discord server for game
development and you hang out on that
discord instead of like a league of
legends discord
you're more likely to develop games in
one than the other right though all
discord is going to cause you to play
games the development discord server is
going to cause you to make games
uh what effect does weed have on adhd
not a good one
in essence
all right so like like weed is like not
a very good drug
especially if you have a developing
brain like if you want to get if you
want to become 35
you have your life established and then
you want to like use weed and it's legal
and stuff i'd say go for it
so i'd say that most
we'll do comparison we'll answer
questions for like 10 more minutes then
we'll do comparison okay
um so like cannabis is one of these why
does cannabis feel like it helps because
it does help certain things and it
screws you over in other ways
so like the reason that cannabis feels
like it helps is because it helps it
just also hurts
right so like here's the it's almost
just like the adhd medication in the
wheelchair analogy where let's say you
use cannabis for your anxiety like it
can help with your anxiety but then not
only will you potentially get rebound
anxiety which is when and so if you use
substances to regular treat anxiety and
you take the substance away you will
actually worsen your anxiety so you get
stuck in this cycle of being dependent
on the substance and that doesn't even
help anymore it's like caffeine where
your body develops a tolerance and then
there's no net positive you become
dependent on it to function
and then it's not actually helping your
anxiety it's just like you've developed
a tolerance
so weed is a problem because it is very
very effective at making your problems
go away
the problem is that it only makes it
makes you feel like your problems go
away it doesn't actually make your
problems go away
it makes your problems usually worse so
like people who drown themselves in
substances
well like oh like once i'm drunk like i
can forget all all of my cares but like
they're your cares for a reason right so
you can do that and you can delay the
clock by 24 hours but all the problems
are still going to be there
um and and this is where you know a lot
of people think that so that's the basic
problem with weed it also tends to mess
with your habit formation circuitry
so like the ability to form good habits
is more difficult while you're using
marijuana so there's a common
misconception that weed like causes iq
problems i don't think it causes iq
problems
what it does is far far more insidious
which is that it causes motivational
problems and habit formation problems
right that's why there's sort of this
idea of a pothead which is like someone
who sits around all day and does nothing
now chances are there's a little bit of
a reciprocal relationship there
that people who who sit around and do
nothing gravitate towards pot and pot
makes people want to sit around and do
nothing so it's not all the pot
the other general thing that you should
be careful about is like if you have a
developing brain and you add substances
to it how does that affect the
development of your brain the short
answer is we don't know
so i'd say like steer clear that stuff
especially if you're like a teenager or
even your earlier early 20s
um
so one person saying how do i deal with
the imposter syndrome of whether i might
actually have adhd or i'm just normal
and lazy especially since the waiting
list for formal assessment is so long
here so if you're stuck
between trying to figure out am i lazy
or do i have adhd really common problem
excellent question what do you do about
it and this is where it's kind of
interesting
but the short answer is it sort of
doesn't matter right so like i know it
sounds kind of weird but whether you
have a diagnostic reason for being the
way that you are or you are lazy
you still have the same shared problem
which is that you're unable to do things
that problem needs to be fixed whether
you have adhd or you're lazy like that's
sort of in a weird way it's almost
irrelevant it does become relevant
because adhd may open up
additional ways to fix it so i'm not
saying it's truly irrelevant but what
i'm saying is that the situation is what
it is
the adhd is just a label that you put
upon it right it may give you some
amount of tools may give you some amount
of options but this is where i'd say
that you know if there are tools to
organize yourself with adhd they may
help you even if you're lazy
so this is where you know your situation
is what it is
irrespective of what label someone will
give you
and so there are things that you can do
irrespective of what label you have
right so what is the nature and
experience of your inability to work
ask yourself that question that question
is the same whether you have adhd or
don't have adhd
and then you ask yourself okay so like
what is like what is it that makes it
hard for me to work is it is it i feel
unmotivated what does that mean
what does unmotivation mean like what
does that mean to feel unmotivated is it
that your mind is distracted is it that
you're afraid of the consequences is it
that when you start to work like you you
automatically compare yourself to other
people and you think there's no point in
studying because this person is going to
do a better job than i i am there are
all kinds of things that can impact your
motivation
and so you have to understand the nature
of your experience you're going to get
more answers studying yourself
than you will from like getting a
particular label and finding external
answers
and that may sound weird you're like but
wait if i have adhd doesn't that mean
that there are all these solutions out
there
news flash is someone who treats people
with adhd they're all on the struggle
bus anyway it certainly can help and
there can be transformative
uh you know interventions that you can
do for adhd i'm not downplaying those
but i'd say like 70 of people that i
diagnosed with adhd still have to go
through the process of like
self-discovering and figuring out what
works for them and that's because adhd
isn't homogeneous it's heterogeneous
right so not everyone's adhd is the same
way
it's at the end of the day like that
personal exploration of what is holding
you back i think is worth way more than
getting a label that applies to a mass
of people for whom different things may
work
right because not all it's not like
there's one medication for adhd there's
like
half a dozen and why is that it's
because different people need different
things
so even the label does not fix your
problems and magically make them go away
so dr k i limited my my caffeine use to
one drink per day and now i'm having
trouble with motivation and focus i was
self-medicating with it
and i now realize it was helping me
function what else can i do cut out that
last cup of caffeine bro
or girl you're fatal dave so i assume
you're a dude but you never know
so this is where like just cut out the
rest of it get completely off of it
that's the right move either go to two
cups a day or no cups a day
so if you needed to so here's okay so
people are wondering why two or none
so caffeine has a half-life which is the
amount of time it takes to like
metabolize the caffeine okay
so when you drink a cup of coffee
there's a period of time where like you
have a high level of caffeine in which
it probably gives you like a work debuff
i mean sorry work buff but then over
time it like the buff declines and then
you may hit this point where it no
longer buffs you and then can actually
you can enter a period of caffeine
withdrawal which is a debuff
which is why people sometimes need
caffeine twice per day right so you like
you get that first buff and as your
level wanes you get that second
afternoon cup of masala chai and then
like that carries you like through the
rest of the day
so you got these like two peaks so for
some people one cup of coffee is enough
to where like they get a mild buff and
they kind of like their half-life is
such that it carries them through the
day without a problem but depending on
your individual metabolism if you're
like me and you're avata
one cup is never enough so it's either
two or bust
so that has to do with your individual
metabolism dr k do you think diagnosing
adhd during drug addiction is possible
yes i think it's possible but it's hard
so what i would do to so the people that
i've diagnosed with adhd who are on
drugs
are the ones that i usually make a
historic diagnosis so i won't send them
for neuropsych testing i'll ask them or
their parents like what was this person
like as a kid
and so you can sort of get enough from a
history to see oh this person probably
had a has adhd even though they're on
substances now and that becomes very
very important because oftentimes adhd
itself being under diagnosed
can keep someone from ever becoming
sober
so there's a whole video on this we did
a lecture on adhd and addiction where we
kind of explored how adhd is a
vulnerability for
for drug use
right so if you are impulsive because
you have adhd and your ability to like
restrain your impulses and act more
emotionally we go through a bunch of
neuroscience and stuff like that there
are a lot of reasons why having
untreated adhd makes sobriety very
difficult
and so interestingly enough sometimes
what i'll have to do is prescribe people
stimulants
get the adhd under control even while
they're like abusing marijuana or
opiates
and then like once the adhd gets under
control then they can actually like get
control of their substance use
so sometimes you have to do it like that
it's tricky
alcohol can be really bad too for adhd
absolutely like we said some people with
adhd use alcohol as like a cognitive
like
depressant right so it slows your mind
down so that you can like focus more
easily
so do i have adhd myself no
i don't think so i probably would have
gotten diagnosed if i was a kid in
today's school system
with adhd
so i have a high level of vata which i
think is quite adhd but i don't think
that my function is impaired that's
partially because of the way that i've
structured my environment
i am about that so i think if i was like
if i was if i was in school now i would
like there's a 50 chance i would get
diagnosed with adhd
based on like i could never study i
could never like if i was interested in
something i could pay attention to it if
not and i was just like kind of smart so
it wasn't that bad of a deal that big of
a deal
can adhd patients become top students at
competitive universities and scientific
fields absolutely
absolutely
i've had those students as my patients
do indian schools diagnose adhd a lot i
don't know
i don't think they they definitely don't
go by doshas
um it's interesting like in india like
the understanding of ayurveda is so like
divided like some people are into it and
some most people are not so they don't
understand like most indian people don't
even understand what dosha is
based on the people i've talked to
okay
let's move on
someone's asking about ox-carbazapine or
trilepto causing adhd or depression
that's definitely a question for your
provider
that's the kind of thing where like
ox-carpazzipine and trilaptal can
definitely cause depressive kind of
symptoms right but like that's
definitely something you should in
concentration problems sure
but that's the kind of discussion you
should be having with your provider
that's the specificity of like if you
guys really want to do a lecture on
pharmacology we can
but
you know because trileptil is a mood
stabilizer right so it's going to like
slow down your action potentials and
stuff which can have a side effect of
being depressed and can lead to
concentration problems but i would
expect trileptal to cause people to have
like slow concentration as opposed to
like
like rapid stuff
is it normal for a psychologist to ask
for blood work to be checked before they
diagnose you with adhd i don't know if
it's normal or not is it smart
absolutely
what do you look for in blood work so we
did we did a lecture on this
chat
there are like six
lab tests that everyone in chat should
get
you guys should get evaluated for six
conditions
because one out of two human beings will
have one of these problems
fifty percent of chat will have one of
these problems
anemia thyroid problems sleep apnea
uh what else
b12 deficiency may be vitamin d
deficiency what was the other one anemia
sleep apnea thyroid
vitamin d diabetes
thanks chad
lab tests for gamers yes thank you tech
teller
yup
vitamin d more than b
for us
chatars
you